Anna Lena, welcome back to Talk Python to Me.
It's awesome to have you here.
Yeah.
Thanks for having me again.
It's always fun to have you on.
You've got interesting and playful topics.
I think the very first time that you were on the show, I can't remember how many
years ago, but it's been a little while, was to talk about learning Python through
Harry Potter.
Is that right?
In the magical universe.
Yeah.
I still love that project a lot.
People can find that on GitHub and they obviously can find the episode on
talkpython.fm.
But we're back for, I would say another playful episode in a sense, right?
Continuing the theme.
I'm going to talk about when should you teach kids to program and maybe even more
importantly, what are some age appropriate resources that spans a good chunk of what
a kid's life is, you know, like, is it kid, not a kid at 18?
I don't know.
But lower than that, a lot of resources.
Exactly.
Yeah.
So that's going to be a lot of fun.
It has been a while since you've been on the show though.
So just a quick introduction about who you are and what you do for everyone listening.
Yeah, actually not much has changed since the last episode.
I think that was on Python packaging.
I'm still a senior machine learning engineer at a German company called Innovex
where I jump from project to project.
I'm currently working at the speech recognition team at Bubble still.
Was that last time as well?
I think so.
I believe so.
Yes.
So, yeah, I'm still there in the project.
I love it.
It's very interesting topic.
And yeah, I love Python.
We have talked about different topics over the years and this time it's on children.
And yeah, a talk I prepared for PyData and the PyCon here in Germany.
And it was lots of fun to learn about it.
Yeah.
It looks like you did a lot of research to go into this.
And I think it's probably worth pointing out that we both are parents.
And so we have some interest in this topics, you know, close to home as well.
My kids are getting a little bit older for any of this kind of guidance, but still,
you know, a lot of things I thought about as they were growing up and some of these
things we're going to talk about I've actually used, you know, before I saw them
on your list as well, which is cool, but yeah, it's a personal topic, I suppose.
Yeah, absolutely.
For me, it's also personal because I did not have any coding opportunities growing
up myself, and I really want this to be different for children growing up now and
my own kids.
So, that's also a reason why I wanted to do the research so that it would be just
different.
Let me know what you think.
But I feel like there are social stigmas, like this person should be a coder and
that person shouldn't be a coder.
They should go do something else.
And that may or may not be around gender, but often it is, unfortunately.
But when you're six years old, you don't care.
You like games, you want to play a game, you want to explore, things are
interesting, right?
So, I feel like this kind of stuff also has a big opportunity to short circuit
these unnecessary influences, I guess, depending on different cultures.
And also just having it in your environment, if there's like a person in
your family or your friend circle, or even at school and you have some
opportunity to learn about it, it helps a lot.
For me, it just wasn't a topic ever.
And I still remember my parents when I told them that I was switched to computer
science in my graduate degree, they were like, "Are you sure you want to do that?
Isn't that like very nerdy, techie stuff?"
And I'm so happy I did the switch, even though it was quite hard in the
beginning, but it's an amazing topic and there's so much cool stuff to do.
It's just not only the nerdy stuff.
It's always got something new.
That's both the benefit and the curse of it.
What you've learned is powerful and helpful, but there's more to learn.
Yeah, always.
But that makes, like, keeps it interesting, right?
You never get bored.
Exactly.
Especially in JavaScript.
Okay.
So I feel like as your parents had that thought, you know, probably
one thing they may have thought, I didn't know, obviously I don't know them,
but a lot of people would think is that's a very antisocial sort of thing, right?
Like, "Oh, you're going into programming.
That means you're going to sit behind a computer screen completely alone
and not talk to people," and I think that's one of the misconceptions of programming.
Yeah, absolutely.
Yeah.
I, like, even now when I'm working remotely, most of the time I have so many
meetings and collaborations with other developers and I don't ever feel not
part of my team, even if I don't see them because we interact so much.
And sometimes they sit on a complete different continent and it still feels
very close and we do laugh and we don't only pair code, but we, like, yeah,
you get to know them well and it's lots of fun, interesting people that are
not the stereotype of coders.
Yeah.
Yeah, absolutely.
I bring that up because I think some people listening might be attracted to
this show who don't necessarily work as programmers themselves, you know?
I can very, like, I can recommend it a lot.
I think it's a lot of fun.
Absolutely.
All right.
Well, we talked about some of the reasons that we're interested in this,
obviously, but why?
I mean, as people who like programming, we may want to communicate or share
that thing we like with other kids, with our kids and so on, but I think
programming also can stand in for a lot of more traditional things, such
as, like, geometry and so on.
Yeah, for me, I think what I like most about it is that you can really make
things, you can see them come alive and it can be a game, it can be something
more math related, it can be music, websites, you can just create anything
that you're interested in and even have so much fun seeing it come to life.
So it's not just learning a skill, maybe for a job or your, like, your life at
home or your hobbies, but it's more of, like, being able to create anything
that you're interested in.
And then of course you have the obvious advantages, like the career
opportunities and lots of skills that are taught by learning how to code that
you do not think about in the beginning, I guess.
Yeah, absolutely.
The realism or the, I've created something I can see, even though it's
still digital and virtual and you can't actually touch it usually, unless it's
like robotic or something, but that's so much more realistic and interactive
than things like, "Oh, you're going to learn these axioms and then we're going
to teach you how to prove stuff about angles and triangles with these axioms."
It's going to teach you logical thinking.
So, you know, sit down for the year and we're going to talk about small
angles, big angles, you know, diagonal, cross connected, all that kind of stuff.
Right.
Which is a little bit useful, but being able to work with computers is way more.
And I think it teaches these problem solving and computational
thinking skills at least as well.
Yeah, absolutely.
Especially what you said, like problem solving, logical thinking that kids,
like not only adults, but kids especially, they understand that you might have a
complex problem you want to solve, but you can break it down into simpler steps.
Like what an algorithm is actually doing, giving you a step-by-step
path to reaching a goal.
And you can teach that not only by coding, also, of course, by just playing and seeing
you want to build this huge Lego piece, but you start building it with little
pieces and put it all together.
And that's also what you have in coding.
You want to reach a goal, you want to program a game or maybe create an
animation and you understand how to break it down and yeah, it helps us or also
kids to make more structured decisions.
Yeah.
I think that's a very valuable skill to learn, not only for coding, but for
everyday life, I guess.
Yeah.
Being able to break problems down and solve them.
I mean, that's like adulthood right there.
Yeah.
What I also find really helpful is one of the skills I looked at specifically
is perseverance and also for kids, they get frustrated so easily and give up and
say like, this is not working.
I don't like this.
Like I hate this and start throwing their toys around.
At least we are at this stage.
And your kids are probably not doing that anymore.
But yeah, I think with coding, when you encourage them to keep going, even or
especially when they fail, that they understand that failure isn't something
bad, but rather it keeps you improving.
It keeps you going and that you can learn to see challenges or problems at something
positive and something you can grow with.
I think that's really, really great about coding because you will have that a
lot when you learn how to code.
Yeah, absolutely.
I absolutely agree with you.
And the problem, this perseverance skill is incredibly important.
I agree.
It manifests itself a little bit differently as they get older.
Instead of going, I dislike this, you know, like these are those toys, crap.
I can't make it do its thing or whatever.
It's more, I can't do this.
I'm not good at this.
And a really important skill I think is not, I can't do this.
Like I need to work at being good at this.
And that perseverance that you learn, honestly, I think one of the very most
important skills that people can have as a programmer or in software development
in general is perseverance.
Like it doesn't work.
I read the docs, still doesn't work.
I read Stack Overflow, people were mean, still didn't help me.
But eventually, you know, I worked my way and now it works.
And it's such a cool feeling to work through those things.
But until you learn the perseverance, you just think, well, I wasn't good at math.
I must not be good at programming.
I'm out.
Yeah.
I think that keeps a lot from a lot of children to learn or to like
learning things that are hard.
I know that lots of kids struggle with math and yes, like STEM classes.
But I think it's often because they feel like I don't understand this.
It might also not be explained in the best way, but they just shut down and say,
okay, I'm just not going to try.
And if you understand, and maybe also I know that there's this huge
psychological research on growth mindset that you understand that you shouldn't
praise just an outcome, but rather the effort that kids try to do something.
They try to improve and put in the work that that's just so much more important
than reaching the goal in the end.
Yeah.
And yeah, we can really help our kids to become more robust and more joyful
about learning by teaching these principles, for example, through learning how to code.
Yeah, absolutely.
Now you did give this as this topic as a talk at PyData.
Was that PyData Berlin?
Where was it?
And I gave it once at PyData London and at PyCon Berlin and at EuroPython.
Okay.
Yeah.
So the reason I was going to bring that up is you had some really cool pictures.
Yeah, I know.
You'd come up with like a little persistent kid working away there and stuff like that.
Right.
Oh, I love them.
I love creating them.
I use Delhi three to create them.
And I spend so much time just playing around with a model and providing it
prompts to see which images I liked best.
Of course, there were the obvious problems with some of them that the kids had six
fingers and so on, but still, it was amazing to create these images.
And I love that, like the perseverance one.
And we can link the article to my blog later where you can see the image.
It's just, everyone laughs when they see the picture.
Yeah, the pictures are great.
The pictures are great.
All right.
Let's talk for a minute about brain development and maybe the different stages
that kids go through, because there's kind of four or five stages, which then you
might map over to the different types of resources that we're going to talk about.
Yeah, I think that's a really important topic to consider.
If you want to understand when your child is able to do certain things, then you need
to be able to understand how their brain develops because our brain matures over
time, it's not fully mature at birth, but quite the opposite.
And some regions of the brain take more time to develop and some like vision and
hearing are quite well-developed already at birth.
So at certain ages, it doesn't make sense to start coding, for example, from zero to
four, and there is not much there for them to really have the cognitive abilities to
understand computational principles or really sit down and concentrate and focus.
So, yeah, for example, at birth, you have quite a lot of neurons already, but just
25% of the adult size brain.
And when you reach the age of four, you already have 80%.
So it has grown a lot through the first four years.
And you do have a lot of influence as a parent or caregiver, friend, whatever.
But, yeah, mostly the primitive areas of the brain develop first, like hearing,
vision, emotional regulation starts developing, but really cognitive and
executive functions like planning and so on come later.
So I guess zero to four years would be or birth would be the first stage and then zero
to four years where you have lots of things happening and you can influence that by
positive influences from like responsive caregiving, that you have diverse learning
experiences and playing with a child.
And then at four years, it starts getting interesting.
And that's also where you can start doing things with your kid.
But do you want to rather talk about the development first and then about...
Maybe we should talk about the resources that go with each stage.
What do you think?
Yeah.
Yeah, let's do that.
That's a good idea.
Yeah, I do too.
Since we already reached age four now.
Oh, yeah, nice.
Yeah, so at age four, you can teach basic algorithmic thinking and which you can ask
questions like, what would you do to guide a lost puppy home?
Just making them start to think about how to break down problems into smaller steps.
But also they have the motor skills at that age and the perceptual abilities to
interact with simple toys that teach the basics of coding.
And you open the BeeBot, which is a tiny floor robot, or I guess it's not so tiny.
It's a bee and it has four directions to go front, back, right, left.
And then you can, I think it can remember up to 130 commands and you can press go
and program the way it's supposed to crawl or walk.
However you want to phrase it.
Yeah, so one thing you might do with this thing is, so this is a little robot that has
wheels, looks like a bee.
What you do is you push the buttons like forward, forward, right, forward, left,
forward, forward.
And you might put out something on the ground, like a little, like, can you make your bee
go around this thing and then through this little gate or whatever, right?
Those kinds of challenges.
I think even when you purchase them, you can purchase rugs that have certain paths on
them and so on.
I guess it's a very, you can spend a lot of money on these kinds of toys.
But maybe as a side note, if you start looking, you will find tons of robots in
different price ranges.
So I guess we will only mention examples, but if you start looking, you will definitely
find lots of different options.
Yeah, yeah, absolutely.
Would you say that this RoboTurtles game falls into the same category or is that a
little bit older?
Oh, I'm not sure from the top of my head if it's older.
What I like about it is that it's a board game.
So I'm always asked about screen-free offers.
So something that you can play without sitting in front of the laptop because screen time
is just a general huge discussion point.
But I would have to look.
So if I, yeah, looking at the box here, it says ages four and up.
So probably.
Oh, nice.
That's really cool.
Yeah.
So this one is, I think it's almost exactly the same problem.
There is a little bit more to it because there's a couple of challenges in the board
game.
So I think we actually have this board game from when my daughter was young.
And you have a little turtle, which is a card and a board, and you can put stuff on the
board, like little rocks.
It can't go through.
Maybe there's like an ice wall and it has ability to like melt the ice, but it has to
do that before it can move forward.
You know, so you, you get a bunch of cards and you put them in a stack and then you like
play them out to see if your turtle wins the game or something like that.
So this is another pretty good option at that age, especially if you want something not
electronic.
Yeah.
What I also like about it is that it becomes a family activity that you learn.
That's just in general, a very good thing if you want to teach your kids how to code,
that you make learning a fun activity and playing games, being with them, showing
interest and having fun doing it as part of gaming or what you do at home, playing board
games.
That's just a very easy way then to get started and to get them interesting.
I should point out like the actual Robot Turtles website has a bad SSL certificate right
now.
So I'm sure you can find it on like Amazon and other places, but yeah, anyway.
Okay.
So what else?
Another one you talked about is cubelets, but this, this feels like this might be a
little bit older.
Yeah.
cubelets it's, well, you can start early with them, but you can also use them at a
later stage because you can program them using visual coding languages or one of them
may code, but you can start quite early.
so yeah, these like cubelets are small physical blocks.
as you can see there that you just plug together and some of them move, some have
cameras or sensors, and you can build lots of cool, unique robots with them.
And if you start looking at demos on YouTube, it's really amazing, how cool they can
look, the end robot.
I think one disadvantage of this is that it's quite expensive.
So one of these blocks is about 50 euros or maybe $45, $50.
So if you want to build big robots and have lots of options, then you need
to invest quite a bit of money.
Yeah.
I like that the website says free shipping on orders over 50.
It's like, okay.
Pretty much anything.
Yeah.
Yeah, I guess.
But I still, I love it because it makes you like be creative.
And, especially having this aspect that you can program them later on using
Mako, that's one of the visual programming language.
I think that's the run for Microsoft.
you can keep using them over a long period of time.
Yeah.
For maybe a mental model for people who haven't seen these in action, because even
looking at the website, you'd have no idea.
Like what, what do I do with these things again?
Why are they here?
I feel like they should have people to animation or something, but there's these
cubes as the name would imply, but they're almost like Lego blocks that each block
is programmable and then you combine them into a thing that does stuff.
Right.
Yeah.
I think you explained it well.
Thanks.
So I think that that's pretty interesting, but this is probably in the next stage,
right?
The next stage would be maybe six to nine.
What do you think?
Yeah.
So, yeah, exactly.
I think the next stage regarding development would be around six to nine.
Of course, you also always have to mention it's, this is now for normally
developing children, just an average, every child is different.
So if you observe your child, you know, which skills develop at what point and
what might be easier for them, what is harder.
So this is not like hard ranges.
but yeah, if you start with about six years of age, you can start
using visual programming tools because, kids become used to using technology.
They have a better hand eye coordination.
And also one very important part of the brain, the prefrontal cortex, it's like
the CEO of our brain has a big growth spurt between five and eight, and this
improves working memory, planning, attention, and all kinds of mechanisms
that you need to start really sitting down and, code.
So, yeah.
you already opened Scratch Junior.
Yeah.
And Scratch Junior is, I think Scratch is quite popular.
One of the most popular, visual coding languages and Scratch Junior is just a
simplified version of it for very young children starting at five to seven.
It's recommended on their website.
so it has no text, but rather actions like movement and in visual programming
in general, you have puzzle pieces, to represent concepts like loops usually,
or I don't know, variables, logical expressions, and you can plug them together.
So you don't have to worry about syntax or using the command line.
You just create these, programs by putting together puzzle pieces.
So that's, and that happens on a visual interface.
So that's what visual programming is about.
And Scratch Junior is just a very simple version.
I think it's just a free app.
You can play on a tablet and create little programs where the
characters move around and do things.
yeah.
Kind of like the bee, but you more, a little closer to real programming,
but then you see the output, right?
Yeah, exactly.
Yeah.
And you start really using, I guess these plug in principles that you
have the blocks that you put together.
So when you go onto, for example, Scratch or another of the visual
programming languages, you're already, you have knowledge about how
it works in general, I guess.
Yeah.
As I look at this website, I was thinking, you know, when I think about
coding, I think about computers, right?
Mac, windows, whatever with apps, but obviously young kids are way more in
tune with touch devices like iPads and Android tablets and stuff, right?
It's amazing how quickly they adapt and learn it.
I think it's quite, sometimes I'm blown away by how young children can
already understand how to swipe and select stuff on a touch screen.
yeah.
Yeah.
I think actually it probably lowers the age by quite a bit that kids are able
to do this kind of stuff because these touch interfaces exist in decent ways.
Yeah, absolutely.
Just, learning how to type is actually one of the main reasons why you can only
start with textual programming, later because typing is hard.
You need to learn how to do it.
and yeah, just touching and dragging and dropping is much easier.
When my older kids were very young, we wanted to have them work with things like
this and just learn how to use computers.
And they, this predated the iPhone.
Like it didn't exist, right?
There was no meaningful touch screens that really you would want to use.
And so we got like, kind of like you get a typing program to learn to touch type.
We got a mousing program and there was like a little airplane and they had to
like chase the airplane around with the mouse to learn how the eye hand
coordination of, of mouse and then like screen, right.
When you're three or four years old, like that's not natural, right.
But touching, oh, they already be all over that.
Yeah.
I think sometimes it's even too intuitive for them.
yeah, that's the problem.
Having like having a very huge influence on them way too early, but I guess
that's a different discussion.
Yeah.
That's a different problem.
That sends you back to a robot turtle board game.
Yeah, exactly.
Yeah.
Okay.
So a little bit later we could do, once you start doing this, some kind of
programming language, then that opens up a bunch of resources, right?
So obviously Scratch is sort of the way more full featured version.
Scratch and junior.
Right.
That's, that's pretty neat.
Yeah.
I think Scratch is amazing because it, I think for kids, it's great.
I know lots of adults that still use it for some projects where you really want
to make it come alive because Scratch is focused on, yeah, having like really
cool, interactive, fun projects.
They have sounds, music, you can add graphics and it's just offers a lot of
functionality to create your project, share them with friends.
Yeah.
And there is a ton of resources on learning Scratch and yeah, as you can see
here, like make music, create a story, create a character, your, I guess
your possibilities are endless.
Yeah.
It looks really, actually I didn't realize all the, all the stuff they got going
here, they have a bunch of tutorials, free coding community, super cool.
Then I guess just while we're talking on these visual programming languages, we
could talk about Blockly, right?
Yeah.
When I, like I knew Blockly existed, it is also free, like Scratch is also free.
I guess that's important to mention.
And Blockly is actually at the basis of most of the other visual languages.
For example, it is actually like block-based languages like Scratch and
MakeCode are based on Blockly.
Blockly is developed by Google.
And with Blockly, it's, I think it's for a bit older kids because it's more low
level, if you can say that it offers you more flexibility, you see the code next
to the blocks, you see it in an editor, how it actually looks like, and you could
copy paste the code into like a normal editor and run it.
And so, yeah, it's more low level, but also somewhat more sophisticated, the
editor that you have it more, it looks more like coding to me than Scratch.
I think maybe the way to think about it, you say it's more low level.
I would say each block almost corresponds to a single symbol of code, almost, right?
Like you have a set variable too, and then you put another block on, which is the
value, and then you've got your visual editor, but then like side by side, you
have your JavaScript, or I imagine you could probably see Python or other
languages if you, there's a dropdown for choosing the output language, but yeah.
It's-
- You can use JavaScript, Python, PHP, Lua, or Dart.
- Interesting.
Okay.
Yeah.
So that's kind of getting a little farther up there and maybe we could talk a bit
about the hardware side, because that's one way that it actually can be something
you can touch and feel as you interact with these ideas, right?
- Yeah.
I know that that's nothing I ever used, but my brother started using it.
Like I know that he bought a Raspberry Pi, you open up the micro bit, which is
like a smaller programmable device.
And the Raspberry Pi would be like full-fledged computer in a tiny device.
But yeah, you can learn a lot about hardware and also coding
by having such devices.
And the micro bit has displays, buttons, sensors, and you can program it using
make code, one of the other visual programming languages.
And I think it's quite cheap compared to other devices, like a Raspberry Pi is.
I think it's not expensive for having all these abilities or these capabilities.
But the micro bit is, I guess, more affordable for lots of people.
Oh yeah, nice.
There you can see how it works.
- Oh, and you know what's really interesting is if you go to makecode.microbit.org,
even if you don't have one of these devices, it comes with a little emulator
and then it has a virtual micro bit that you can write code against.
And it gives you an option as well to choose Python or Blockly or some other way
of working with it, which is pretty cool.
- Yeah, exactly.
That's also why it's recommended for children, like officially it's recommended
for children at the age of eight or older.
And Blockly, I think is even recommended for kids starting at 10.
Yeah, whereas Scratch is for even younger children, right?
They say you can get started at eight.
And they say, I think, which is funny, they say it's up to 16, which doesn't
make sense to me, why would there be an upper limit?
But yeah, anyway, you can still-
- Sorry, you're 17, you have to do C++ now.
- Yes, exactly.
Also, I think what is great about visual programming is that you can always come
back to it, it's not that you progress from these robots to visual programming
to textual programming, but you can use visual programming for doing, I don't know,
digital stories, and you can still do textual programming at work.
Yeah, it's just having all these options now is really nice.
- Yeah, absolutely.
Let's see, we also have Zoomie.
Zoomie is pretty cool.
Let's come back to Zoomie.
I do want to talk about something that's a little bit more real similar to the
micro bit first, is many of the things over at Adafruit.
Are you a fan of Adafruit?
- I don't know Adafruit, tell me about it.
- So this is a company that creates a whole bunch of small devices like the BBC
micro bit that runs CircuitPython.
So there's just tons and tons of things you can buy.
You can buy little sensors and you can buy little E-ink displays or whatever it is
that you're looking for.
And there's just many, many little ways to make these projects a little bit more
than a micro bit.
So for example, you could get one of these ESP32 devices, but it has like a little
tiny display on it that you can output your text to and it costs $19.
You know what I mean?
Which is pretty ridiculous.
And they often come with tutorials on how to do it.
So if you're into this kind of stuff, this is a perfect place to go look.
- Yeah.
Also, there's just so much opportunity to learn even for being the parent.
I would learn so much from doing this.
It would be so valuable to me to learn more about the hardware side of things,
especially because I would never sit down and buy myself a Raspberry Pi
I don't know why, but I wouldn't do it.
I just don't find the time.
- You already have a computer and all that.
- Yeah.
And if I can do it together with my children, I think that's just amazing.
It's really cool.
And this is just a general thing about learning with kids.
If you learn together with them, they can also be the expert sometimes,
which is amazing for kids.
If they can explain something to you that they understand better, it gives them so
much joy and helps them develop this passion and love for learning.
I think that's a great thing about learning how to code.
That doesn't matter if you are the best coder, but you can just use it as a way
to improve yourself.
- Yeah.
And once they get that mastery, they're like, "Oh, now I've gone beyond them."
It's probably a really good feeling.
- If my kids want to learn how to code early, like much earlier than myself,
they will become so much better than me so quickly.
Yeah.
- Yeah, for sure.
I have one of these little devices here.
You put it in your hand.
It's like certainly smaller than the palm of my hand.
And this thing manages the DNS and ad blocking on my network.
It was like 20 bucks or something.
Yeah.
So there's sort of less playful, more interesting.
Also, just utilitarian things you can do with these little things.
- Yeah.
Yeah, absolutely.
- All right.
Back to Zoomi, which is in the same age category, I would say.
This is like around 10 years or so.
But it's more robot-like, right?
- Yeah, exactly.
Like, it's a self-driving car kit.
Like, it's a small car.
And it has so many capabilities.
You can program it using Python and Blockly.
And it can, yeah, like you can even teach it about driving certain ways by providing
your own datasets.
So there is a lot of machine learning.
Even you can teach it.
It offers so many opportunities or ways to create projects.
At my company, we have done quite a few workshops with kids with Zoomi.
And they love doing it.
And the adults love doing it too.
- Nice.
So it's like a self-driving car kit.
So if you wanted to try to...
Instead of maybe teaching it, you go forward three steps, you turn right,
you go forward two steps, you turn left, you teach it.
If you see a turn left sign, you turn left or something like that, right?
- Yes.
Exactly, yeah.
It can really understand or analyze its environment.
- Yeah, that's pretty awesome.
Okay.
And you do events with these?
- Yeah.
That's also maybe advice for people that want to get started.
It's always useful to check out local events that happen at companies that are
close to where you live or universities.
They do offer a lot of free...
Often offer free workshops for kids where you can sign them up to learn
about robotics or coding.
And it can be like an easy way to get them started if you find it hard
to do it yourself.
- Yeah.
I think a lot, at least in the US, there's quite a few programs for like
summer teen programs that do like either 3D printing or, you know,
coding with, you know, Lego robots or whatever.
So there's a lot of summer camps and that type of things.
- Yeah.
I guess that's very big in the US.
In Germany, I think not so much.
Maybe it's growing.
But yeah, you can definitely spend a lot of time doing it.
I know that like we at our company, we sometimes offer day workshops where
you can just start getting to know about a topic or just play around with things,
becoming kids interested in the topic in the first place.
- Yeah.
Yeah, that's really neat.
Last in the category of hardware here, you already mentioned it though,
is Raspberry Pi, which I guess is a little closer to just a real computer, right?
- Yeah.
Yeah, it's a really powerful device.
So it's basically a very small and cheap computer that runs Linux.
But you can use it to learn coding, but you can also build hardware projects
with it, do home automation, learn about the Internet of Things.
But it's recommended for kids starting at 11 years, so quite a bit older
because you need programming.
And this maybe also shifts over to the next age range, namely when your kids have
typing skills and also a more well-developed cognitive abilities,
the prefrontal cortex, which I talked about, the CEO of the brain,
the development starts to mature and stabilize.
So planning, organizing, thinking abstractly, all these skills become
more fully developed.
And you, of course, need the typing skills to get started with textual coding.
So at the age 9 plus, most of the time, you can get started with these things.
For example, with like programming Raspberry Pi or just more traditional
textual programming languages.
- Yeah.
Yeah.
The typing skills is pretty interesting, I think.
You know, one that I know you've talked about before, but I think is also super
interesting as a gateway to this, this is the best one that I know,
maybe people know of others as well, is Code Combat.
- You did a podcast episode on it.
- Yeah.
This is one of the ones, like my daughter and I both subscribed to this for a while
when she was younger.
And we'd go through and we did, I don't know, like, I can't remember,
I think she did 30 or 40 code challenges through there or something like that,
which was pretty awesome.
And I also had the guys on the show, yeah.
It's been a little while.
- Yeah.
Yeah, it has been.
But it's still, I think it's an amazing resource.
So you, Code Combat is about learning how to code through gaming.
So you play a game from beginning to end.
And while you play the game, you learn to code in Python or JavaScript.
I think there are several languages, but you really do textual programming.
And if your kid likes gaming or this is something that makes it easier for them
to get started with coding, it's an amazing resource, even though you have
to pay for it because you're really guided through the course,
you can have lessons.
You can even have, I think, teacher lessons once or twice a week,
dependent on your subscription plan.
- Yeah.
I think there might be a free tier if you tell it you're a student,
but you can only do certain challenges.
Like, for example, see this, there's like a locks here and it says,
I think, yeah, I have to subscribe to this if I want to solve all the puzzles.
But there's some of them you can do for free, I believe.
I don't feel like we had to pay at the beginning,
but they could have changed their model.
- No, I think I also played around with it,
but at least in the beginning, you can try it out for free.
- Yeah.
What I really like about this, you know, so if you click on...
If you go to this, you click on one of the things, it says,
for this challenge, you're going to learn arguments and syntax.
Or if you come over here and you click on this one,
it'll say you'll learn while loops or whatever.
But then it gives you just a nice, simple challenge.
So, but what's cool...
Oh, no, in order to play that one, I got to...
Can I play this one?
Yeah, here you go.
So you have this character and what's...
Oh, my gosh, I made that very large.
What's really cool though is when you...
It gives you a little hint, but the editor...
Here's what I think is special about Code Combat.
The editor is autocomplete like you have never seen.
You know what I mean?
So it says, all right, what you need to do is build a fence.
And you have a hero and the hero has the ability to say,
build at X, Y position, or it could move.
And if I just type the letter D,
it'll autocomplete like hero.move down.
Or if I say hero build X, Y,
it automatically puts in all the...
So if you can type just a couple of characters,
it'll keep the syntax,
like the spacing for indentation and block definitions.
And all of that kind of stuff is ridiculous for how...
You don't even have to really have the right syntax.
You just have to put a little bit of some kind of word
in there at all, and it'll start to write all of it for you,
which I think that's the magic here.
- It's nice that you have this insider knowledge
by having tried it out yourself for quite a while.
- Yeah, it worked way better than other stuff
when my daughter was young and I was trying to teach her
like beyond the visual programming things.
But it's so forgiving compared to,
well, here's your favorite editor and you start typing,
oh, why won't it run?
There's three spaces, not four.
Oh, I see.
All that kind of detail you gotta normally deal with.
- Yeah, it can be so frustrating in the beginning
if you need to learn about everything at the same time,
like syntax, spacing, brackets.
And it's just a lot to learn in the beginning
if you just want to understand the basic concept
like for a start.
- Yeah, absolutely.
Another thing you put out there was Code Club.
- Yeah, that's I think a really cool resource
by the Raspberry Pi Foundation.
So it's a platform and it guides your kids
from lesson to lesson.
So you start with learning Scratch,
but then it progresses onto Python.
And yeah, you can start, I think at the age of eight.
Yeah, you can start at the age of eight,
which is also the recommended age for Scratch.
And this is just an example for a full platform
that you can use to guide yourself or your children
through progressing from one thing to the other.
And I think it's also free.
So if you start looking,
there are lots of online coding classes that you can use
that teach you different things
and have a whole program and sets of ideas
behind how to approach different topics.
- Yeah, this looks very fun.
And the example, at least they have on the screen
is using Blockly, right?
Or Scratch, one of them.
- I think it's Scratch.
Yeah, I think level one is Scratch
and then level two would be Python
and more comes after that.
- Yeah, that's really cool.
Another one in this realm is Hedi.
I had not heard of Hedi.
- Yeah, me neither.
Just when I started researching the topic,
why I chose it as an example
is that I just like the concept of gradual programming.
So gradual programming means that,
what I just mentioned basically,
that if you learn language, speaking,
or like a programming language,
you have to learn a lot at the same time.
It can be overwhelming.
You have concepts like loops, if-else,
and syntax like quotation marks, round brackets.
And in Hedi, it's free.
Like it's a web-based interface
and your concepts are introduced
with as little syntax and then refined.
So in the beginning, you can just type print and the text
and you don't have to worry
about quotation marks or brackets.
It's just introduced at a later stage.
So it mimics the way in which we would learn a language.
And in the end, it's based on Python.
So you learn a subset of Python,
not the entire programming language,
but it's syntactically valid
and you have all the right syntax.
But for some kids, it might be easier to get started
with having not everything,
like being part of what you have to code yourself.
- Right, like learning,
oh, whoops, you forgot to close the parentheses.
So it's not gonna run, or you forgot to close the quote.
So it won't work, something like that.
- Yeah, exactly.
Yeah, kids run into that all the time
'cause they're like, well, I see the words on the screen
that I wanted to do,
but I don't know, you gotta put it in quotes.
And why?
- Oh, and maybe regarding the age,
this is recommended for age 10 plus years.
So yeah, when you want to get started
with actual textual programming.
So it fits into the third age range that we discussed.
- Excellent, okay.
And yeah, that's pretty much the last limited age range,
I guess you would say,
before you just go and do regular programming, right?
- Exactly, from there, you can just progress
onto more traditional programming languages.
There are lots of resources,
like from the Bersperry Pi Foundation,
they have Python courses, and there's some on Udemy.
If you start looking,
there are tons of resources to get started.
There are lots of online and on-site classes
that teach kids starting at various ages.
Yeah, I know about a few German offers
where you can really find what you're interested in,
which is really important,
like make coding fun and learning fun for kids.
So find out what they are interested in,
what their passion is,
and then find something that fits their interest.
- Mm-hmm, I'm sure there's a ton of stuff on YouTube
as well to help people, but at least I'm out of touch.
I bet there's a lot on TikTok, actually.
- Oh yeah, I'm out of touch with that as well.
- Just, you know, you learn one concept every 30 seconds,
you just swipe away until you're a programmer.
- I should actually look at that, probably,
when talking about coding with kids.
I guess that's something that would,
or can play a big part.
- Yeah, yeah, for sure, or Instagram Reels or whatever.
All right, I think that kinda touches on
most of the resources that we have.
There's one more I do wanna talk about, though,
and I think this probably is good around,
it's beyond the code combat stage,
where kids can actually use an editor
to create proper, valid syntax,
but it's not much beyond that, and that's Anvil.
Anvil, @anvil.works, are you familiar with Anvil?
- No.
- So I've had Meredith, the creator of this, online,
on the show, but what's really interesting is
it's a way to visually build webpages
that are actual, real webpages that people can actually,
you know, you publish it, your family
or your friends could use it.
So if you wanted to build something
like a Harry Potter type thing,
and you could have your friends vote on which one,
which character is their favorite,
or in why, or whatever, you know,
like you could build this into a webpage and publish it,
and with so many of these projects, it's like,
okay, I built this cool thing, how do I share it?
Or how do I make it look like the thing that I use?
You know, and so you can do this drag and drop,
build it out thing, but then you write the,
the front end interactive code in Python,
in true Python, not JavaScript,
and then it has kind of like a simplified database
in the backend, so it has like a little bit
of like persistence and storage, but it's really cool.
After we did Code Combat with my daughter,
we went and we did this, and she built a bunch of things
that were like really, she really thought were pretty neat.
She could share with people and, you know,
have people input little text messages or whatever.
- I love that, yeah.
I would, again, I know very, like,
I have very little knowledge about web programming,
so this would be a good tool for me to get started as well.
- Yeah, well, also the problem is,
even if you're a very good web programmer,
it's like, okay, kid, you go from Code Combat 2,
now you're doing CSS, HTML, database,
you know, like the explosion of complexity that puts,
and then you do all that, and then how do you even put it
on the web, it's just so out of control,
that step from one to the next, and so if people want
to do anything with like webpages and Python,
this is a really cool option, I think, right here.
- Pretty cool, yeah.
And like speaking from your experience,
how did you get your kids excited about coding?
Did they just like it, or do they hate it?
- They were, that's a good question.
So my older daughters, they grew up with less technology
'cause they're older, so at first,
they weren't super into it, but then they got into college
and they had to start learning things for their degree,
and so now one of my daughters is doing a lot with R,
which is fine 'cause she's in psychology,
and that's what all of her colleagues are using, so.
- Which is fine, it's not ideal, but it's fine.
- It's not ideal, it's fine, no.
I'm not that, no, I'm very proud of her.
So I think that's, I think there's different things
that can motivate you, you know, you can just be curious.
Like my youngest daughter's like, let's play games,
let's play code combat, then she's like,
I want to build something for my friend, you know,
and so we did this thing with Anvil,
and she was very motivated to like seek out the technology
and play with it, whereas my older daughters,
I think they weren't that interested,
and they had other things to do,
but once they got somewhere with a job
or with their education where they needed it,
then all of a sudden it was more interesting.
So, you know, it varies by kid, I think.
- Yeah, absolutely, and I guess that's fine as well.
Not everyone needs to like coding,
but just having the opportunity to learn about it
and experience yourself,
if it's something that you actually like.
I was just so blown away when I experienced
how fun it is to learn how to code.
I always thought it was boring
and yeah, having all these stereotypes in my head,
because I never actually knew anyone that was coding.
- Yeah, yeah, yeah.
- Yeah, it's nice that they had the opportunity
to learn about it at home.
- Yeah, it absolutely is.
So I think we have a little more follow-up here
on the TikTok learning style.
@tikfastfather says, "You can learn every single short,
"but you won't remember anything as you flip through them."
Flip, flip, flip, which is probably true.
And then also, Christian asks,
"Do you think Scratch is good to start with for kids?"
Like if you had a kid who was 10, 11, 12, 13,
what would you start them with?
- Yeah, I would get started with visual programming.
I think it makes it easier.
I know that for some kids it can be hard then
to progress onto textual programming,
but I guess this is just a general thing.
You need to see what works.
It's not that you, it might be that you start with one thing
and you see, actually it doesn't work for us,
and then you have to switch tracks.
And that will happen a lot, and that's just fine.
You need to find your own path through it.
And don't be afraid to actually make changes
if you are not enjoying what,
or your kid is not enjoying their work.
But I think visual programming is a great and fun way
to get started with coding concepts
and not have it feel like you're actually coding.
- Yeah, absolutely.
So Christiane's child is 13.
I would look, I would consider code combat, actually.
I think, you know, 13, you're well enough
to do textual stuff if it's not too much drudgery, right?
Like matching braces and quotes and all that.
So maybe if this kind of thing inspires,
maybe that as well.
- Yeah, absolutely.
I think 13 is great for getting started
with textual programming as well.
And what's so nice about having large language models now
is that lots of these offers are being translated
to various languages, and it is becoming much more easy
to get started in your native language,
which might not be English,
and then you do not have to learn a language
while you learn how to code.
Yeah, that's also, I think,
a huge advantage of the current time.
- Yeah, that's something that's always been interesting
to me is so many of the programming languages are in English,
but many of the programmers,
their first language is not English.
And you know, maybe, like your English is perfect, I'm sure.
You know, for a while, it's no big deal.
But when you're 10 years old,
here you need to learn a program.
Well, by the way, it's in a foreign language.
That's just, that's pretty wild, right?
- Yeah, absolutely. - That's gotta be challenging.
What was yours?
How do you feel about this?
I mean, you're more in it than I am.
- Yeah, I would always start,
like if you have the chance,
then start in the native language of the child,
and you will definitely find good ways to get started
and good offers.
For example, Scratch, I think,
is available in lots of languages.
70 languages, actually.
So yeah, choose something that keeps the cognitive effort
that you need to get started with simpler,
because otherwise you really have to learn two things
at the same time, learning a language
and learning all these concepts,
and it can then be overwhelming.
- Yeah, it's not something that I had to deal with,
but looking back, I'm like, wow,
I was pretty lucky that I didn't have to learn
what all the keywords meant in addition
to just what I was trying to do.
- Yeah, absolutely.
That's also actually why I decided to study in English,
because I knew all the papers I'm reading are in English,
all the code I'm writing is in English.
It doesn't make sense to study it in German.
It's just weird.
- Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
It's, the internet has done some interesting things
to just sort of spread everything around globally.
So, all right, Elena, this has been awesome.
A bunch of concrete things for people to take
and work with their kids,
maybe if they're grandparents, their grandchildren,
or if they're teachers or friends, kids or whatever, right?
How about some, yeah, how about some final advice
to close out the topic?
- Yeah, I think for me, two things are the most important.
One's namely, first, don't force your child
to learn how to code,
but see if you can find a way that makes it fun for them.
I think making or learning that learning
is actually a cool thing,
is like, it offers you,
or it opens you so many doors in your life
that you learn that putting in the effort,
and even if something is complicated, is worth it.
It's just one of the most valuable skills
you can provide your child with.
So, yeah, learning how to learn
and how to love learning, I guess.
And there's lots of ways in which you can do it.
Choose the right topics, be patient,
sit down with your kids and learn together.
Don't force them to sit down for long times
and like rather distribute learning sessions over time.
Don't be afraid to switch tracks.
I think lots of the things that apply to adults
also apply to children regarding learning.
- Absolutely.
Very good advice.
I would just maybe re-emphasize
that people should reward persistence.
- Yeah. - Right?
Reward it very, very highly.
Like, I can't believe you spent half an hour
and you just barely got it to print hello,
but that's actually a massive accomplishment.
And like, I'm so proud of how hard you focused
and worked on it, right?
That's a big deal. - Exactly, yeah.
Yeah, that's like, it makes a huge difference to kids.
- Yeah, probably adults as well.
And also- - Yeah, yeah, everyone.
But you lay the foundation for learning, right?
So, thank you. - Absolutely.
- Yeah.
- Yeah, I mean, that expands onto being good at literature
or being good at philosophy or like whatever it is
that's hard to learn. - And just believing
that you can learn anything.
- Yes, exactly.
And the other is to try to capture inspiration.
If they're like really, really excited
and they really wanna learn a thing at that moment,
then you could introduce some of these tools.
But if they're like,
I wanna go outside and play with my friends.
You're like, no, come in here, we're doing coding.
Like, maybe that's not the moment, yeah?
- Exactly, yeah.
- All right.
Thank you for taking the time to put this all together
and coming on the show and nice to have you back, so.
- Yeah, thank you.
- Yeah, thanks, bye.
- Bye.